This is the Escher overlay HeatmapBuilderV7.html.  This is a modified version of Escher 1.2 

which is designed to allow one to add timeseries protein expression heatmaps to the escher map.


Instructions:

Extract all files and folders to a new folder. Default options should work best for this. 

By default you should now have a folder named "HeatmapBuilderv7" and the contents of this file 

should be:

A folder named "RequiredFiles"
A folder named "Samples"
A file named "HeatmapBuilderV7.html"
A file named "InstructionsForViewer.txt" which includes the instructions that you are reading 

now.

Run the program by dragging the file called HeatmapBuilderV7.html into an open window of the web 

browser Google Chrome. This program is not tested in any other browsers (such as firefox, safari 

or internet explorer and so probably will not work in those browsers).

Load the Escher map by clicking on "Map" at the top of the window and selecting "Load Map JSON 

(Ctrl+O)".  There is a sample escher map "AminosugarmetabolismSampleMap.json" in the file 

Samples.

On the map, under the reaction names should be smaller text, these are the gene reaction rules. 

These are what are used to associate protein expression data with the reactions.


To add protein heatmaps click on the "Add protein heatmaps" button in the lower left side of the 

screen.  This will open an ugly box on the top left of the screen.  Load the protein expression 

data by clicking on "Choose File" and choosing the CSV file which contains the expression data.

The CSV (Comma separated variable) file should be formatted following the example file 

"SampleData.csv" located in Samples.

The first line of the file is the headers. The header in the first cell is not used but the 

remainder of the first row is the names of the data columns and are used for the column names in 

the generated heatmaps.

The first column of the CSV file for the remainder of the rows gives the rowname for the 

generated heatmaps and should contain the gene or protein ID in the exact same format as those 

listed in the gene reaction rules for the map. For example in the sample, both the map and the 

expression csv have the proteins identified by their pt3 ID number.

The remaining cells should contain numbers. This version of the heatmap viewer was designed to 

display log_2 fold scaled numbers which lie between -4.5 and 4.5.



After adding heatmaps. You have several options available to change their appearance. You can 

set the cell size by clicking "set cell size" to make the heatmap squares larger or smaller 

(default is 60).

Hitting the v key (or clicking on select mode) in the escher plot will allows you to select 

heatmaps by clicking on them, you can drag them around in the same way you can drag escher nodes 

(like metabolites and reactions) to reposition them.

Clicking on "Change color scale" lets you define the colors and the color stops to use when 

rendering the heatmap. 

Clicking "Add row to current heatmap" when a heatmap is selected (Selected heatmaps have a black 

border outlining them) will ask you to type the name for the row that you want to be added to a 

particular heatmap.  The row name must match the geneID that is used with the data (entries from 

the first column of the CSV file).

Clicking "Reset all heatmaps" will remove all added rows from all heatmaps.




For other display options. Click "Open other options".

You can use these to change the default name of the map (the file name of the map when it is 

saved). You can color the metabolite circles by detected compartments (define different colors 

if the metabolite is in the mitocondria, the cytoplasm etc).  If the connecting lines look way 

off (swooping in all sorts of directions) and it would be too much work to set the bevils 

correctly, you can select the troubled reactions and nodes and click the button "Make selected 

reactions look angular" to make the lines between nodes point directly from node to node.

Finally you can change the font size for the names of the selected reactions.
